My father is an internal medicine physician, and throughout my youth, I had always planned on following in his footsteps. I hoped to become a cardiologist; it seemed both challenging and fascinating. However, after I began my pre-med requirements at Metropolis University, curiously, a single class changed the trajectory of my life. The course was titled “The Science and Business of Cancer Therapies,” and it challenged my beliefs and sense of self in a way no biology or chemistry class ever had. As I delved deep into the study of cancer treatments, pharmaceutical companies, and medical patents, I faced a startling reality: the United States does not offer a singular healthcare system, but rather an array of systems in which certain populations suffer inferior outcomes for reasons as simple as their ZIP Code. Most troubling was the realization that in low-income counties not far from my home, residents face cancer recovery rates 10-20% lower than my own neighbors might.

Issues like these trouble me. Yet, they explain why I changed my major to Community Health with a concentration in Health Planning and Administration, and why I pursued an administrative internship at Kent Hospital in Smallville, KS. They also explain why I am applying to the Master of Health Administration program at Gotham University today. By becoming an administrative leader, I can play a role in improving healthcare access for far more people than I ever could as a doctor.

The MHA program at the Gotham Luther School of Public Health is my top choice for several reasons, with the yearlong residency chief among them. Far more intense than the simulations or short-terms residencies at other programs, this experience of working full-time in a healthcare setting will prove impactful as I begin my career. It is encouraging to see students from the class of 2022 being placed in residencies in locations as widespread as California, New York, and Florida. Yet, as a Midwesterner, it is also empowering to know that I could work in Kansas if this gave me a greater chance to learn and grow. At the same time, the program’s numerous finance courses interest me deeply. Though I have taken multiple undergraduate courses in healthcare finance and data analysis, I recognize the importance of preparing thoroughly for the complex quantitative aspects of a career in service to large, diverse communities. Encapsulating all of these efforts in an accelerated program will surely be challenging, but this gives me confidence that my Gotham education will make me immediately ready to contribute as a healthcare leader upon graduating.

I also look forward to numerous co-curricular opportunities at Gotham, especially those that will allow me to promote accessibility while learning about large-scale health policy applications. The American Mock World Health Organization seems particularly intriguing. Participating in simulations of the World Health Assembly stands out as an opportunity to consider policy from a macroscopic perspective, and I am excited that Gotham is one of the very few schools who participate. For all these reasons, I feel certain that the Luther MHA program is uniquely poised to offer opportunities I could not find anywhere else.

While I believe my academic record, highlighted by my 3.9 major GPA, demonstrates that I will be a strong addition to the MHA program, I think my experience in a hospital setting gives me a unique perspective that other candidates may not have. While interning at Kent Hospital in the summer of 2021, I worked with a wide range of healthcare professionals, including physical therapists, physicians, and hospital administrators. On one particularly impactful project, I was tasked with helping a team interpret three months of patient-survey data and identifying correlations. Which floor the patient stayed on, the problems that occurred most frequently (lack of communication, long discharge process, unprofessional behavior, cleanliness), and the patient’s likelihood of recommending the hospital to family – these all provided clues to improving patient outcomes and hospital efficiency. I am proud that our findings convinced leadership to address numerous concerns, including revamping their discharge process (the most frequent complaint) and creating a policy requiring physicians and nurses to walk into treatment rooms together to address a perceived lack of communication (another recurring grievance).

At Kent, I also helped launch a new policy-and-contract software that the hospital is implementing today. Their goal was to make all documents available digitally and I helped by uploading thousands of policies, vendor and physician contracts, and affiliation, sales, and licensing agreements into a new database. Yet, in the end, I feel strongly that my most important experience was shadowing both administrative and operational leaders. I spent hours, and sometimes weeks, with people in nearly every department, from the CEO’s office to patient safety, physician relations, and sterile processing. Observing their interactions made me realize how much collaboration and teamwork goes into making sure a hospital operates smoothly, and I eagerly await the chance to contribute to such teams on a larger scale.

My career goal is simple: to attain a leadership position in the administrative side of a hospital or healthcare system where I can be of service to communities who, for whatever reason, are not receiving the exceptional care they need. Metropolis, Gotham City, Cincinnati, and Detroit all interest me because 25% or more of their populations live in poverty, almost certainly reflecting unique healthcare needs. I am particularly interested in organizations whose grassroots efforts include opening more free health clinics, hiring more bilingual healthcare workers, hosting educational seminars, and incentivizing physicians and nurses to spend time helping these communities. Thus, organizations such as Stark Health in New Jersey and Shield Health in Illinois are of particular interest to me; the former because of their disease prevention initiatives, and chronic disease-care programs for the uninsured, and the latter for the way they reinvest in community benefit programs for those without the ability to pay. Of course, I realize that I am one person and that the health disparities many communities face are complex beyond reason. Yet, through steady efforts and continued devotion to educating, screening, and treating those who currently face gaps in healthcare access, I am confident that I can build the kind of career that I consider a success.

The first step to accomplishing this goal is to maximize all the resources available in the Gotham MHA program. During my internship at Kent, every leadership-team member held advanced degrees, typically an MHA, with approximately half also holding an MBA. Through my work with these professionals, I saw firsthand (and learned from anecdotes) how invaluable an advanced Healthcare Administration program can be. The majority of these administrators completed their degrees later in their career, indicating that I will face unique challenges as a recent graduate. Yet, I look forward to surmounting these challenges, knowing it will put me at an advantage professionally and provide me with all the more opportunities to make a difference in my career. Even though the Gotham University MHA program will undoubtedly present a great challenge, I know it will prepare me for a lifelong career in healthcare, and in service to my community.
