A hallmark moment for any dental student is their first successful treatment — a denture restoring a smile, a restoration alleviating pain, or any procedure returning physiological function of the oral cavity. This is a pious and cathartic experience after three years of trials and tribulations studying dentistry in India. However, this feeling did not last long for me, as I experienced a gradual shift in perspective, a result of my close interactions with patients. My eyes opened to problems outside patient’s oral cavities, a dentist’s most common area of interest. As India and particularly richer cities like Bangalore marched ahead in their growth stories, multiple antithetical experiences in basic healthcare started to deeply plague me. Some of the recurring themes among patients, as evidenced in literature as well, were — affordability of appropriate care, impaired access to healthcare facilities, and distrust in the quality of health systems in place. This has been consistent in the feedback I receive from patients too. More perniciously, an overall unsatisfactory experience with the dental hospital system eventually drove them away, never to return or follow up. However, the holistic picture across the country is much more stark.

World Bank data suggests that about 62% of health expenditure in India is out of pocket by patients, the economic consequences of which could be dire for families from lower income brackets. In addition, existing solutions are only stopgap solutions. For example, private intervention in healthcare is good; but potential market failures and information asymmetry between patients and providers is largely disadvantageous to poorer patients, leading to disastrous consequences. While I noticed these issues long before the pandemic, the second wave of Covid-19, which devastated India, brought them to the forefront. I recall making frantic calls to secure hospital beds not just for my family, but strangers as well. This left a lasting feeling of helplessness that I needed to address. Issues of oxygen supply chain, inefficient resource management in delivering timely healthcare, and feeble policymaking further deteriorated the previously problematic healthcare system. This makes a basic premise for my deep interest in studying healthcare policy and administration.

At Gotham University, I plan to study the complex nature of healthcare administration. Studying at the Health Policy & Management Department will enable me to address the following issues based on aforementioned themes: How can we prevent entire families from declaring bankruptcy due to healthcare costs? How can hospitals continuously improve the overall health of a community? These questions spring to mind as I contemplate the future, and warrant a unique set of skills including but not limited to financial management of health services, developing evolved payment methods, and analytics in healthcare.

I look forward to courses like Database Systems which will allow me to work with relational database systems, build on my elementary understanding of SQL, and help me work with data to make informed decisions. As an international student in a region with very little context of demographic and health trends, I believe Population Health Informatics will also provide an indispensable skill. Factoring appropriate epidemiological data into managerial decision-making – this is something I can take with me back home, given the apparent spatial health disparities. Furthermore, I believe it is of utmost importance for health systems to be cognizant of health trends in the communities they serve.

Thus, beyond the core curriculum, the Value-Driven Insurance Design Institute will allow me to explore pertinent concepts like alternative, value-based payment, which would be pivotal in reducing bankruptcies secondary to healthcare costs. The clinical nuances driving value-based insurance design play to my strengths as a clinician. Furthermore, I believe the Stark Leadership Center will provide valuable insight from industry practitioners, allowing me to build vital relationships, and helping me leverage cutting-edge research into the kind of decision-making that is crucial for fostering innovation. Lastly, I feel enthusiastic about participating in case competitions where I can hone high-level analytical skills while networking with peers from other schools.

I fully realize the extent of the transition I intend to make, from a clinical field of study to that of management and administration. In my mandatory internship year as a dental student, I went beyond my confined role to assist in floor-level administration duties like stock/inventory management, maintaining outpatient registries, and addressing patient complaints. Part of my daily life as a dental student involved devising and revising treatment plans to fit patients’ affordability, helping patients get through their anxiety, and managing their pain effectively.

To cement my understanding, I attempted to write on how the patient inflow at my hospital was affected due to the pandemic and the government policies put in place, taking into account stringency measures such as travel bans, school closures, etc. While the paper still needs work, I used the opportunity to teach myself basic Excel, data visualization, and entry-level data analysis. I then understood the value that regression analysis brings to the table.

With a newfound hunger for knowledge in the healthcare domain, I enrolled in a Graduate Certificate course at The Public Policy Institute of Bangalore, for which I received a scholarship for my keen interest in the field as a dental student. I gained a clearer understanding of the multifaceted nature of healthcare. The highlight of my time at PPIB was learning Bardach’s Eightfold Path to policy analysis during a rigorous workshop, where I worked with a diverse team involving IT professionals and a nuclear medicine physicist. This provided me with a strong framework to approach problem-solving.

I aim to retain a strong focus on the health system in the future, working as a healthcare management consultant to bridge gaps between providers and payers. Gotham University will be instrumental in making me a well-rounded healthcare manager, through its courses designed to cover a range of competencies like financing and strategic operations.

In an extremely heterogeneous society such as India with multidimensional divisions based on — caste, ethnicity, color, and region, a hierarchical structure backboned by the above is a lived experience to me. However, I am deeply privileged compared to most of my country in having the ability to apply to Gotham University. Beyond acknowledging this, it is my single-minded focus to work on healthcare systems to break these hierarchies.
