After hundreds of hours and thousands of pounds of disposable lab supplies, the catalytic enzyme I worked on at Dr. Bruce Banner’s lab only saw incremental improvement. Yet, Marinus, a cutting-edge physics based protein-folding software that I learned to use in this lab, replicated my months of work in the blink of an eye. The first time I saw a protein fold and dock to a ligand on my computer screen, I was thrilled. Though I had originally come to Dr. Banner’s Protein Engineering Institute to learn more about in-vitro enzyme design, I found myself more and more captivated by the exciting possibilities offered by in-silico design.

This excitement resonated shortly after, when I read about DSP-1181, an OCD treatment. According to Nature, the average drug costs $2.6 billion to develop, yet DSP-1181 was developed five times faster than usual using Exscientia’s AI tool, significantly reducing its development cost. Innovations like these fascinate me. Along with drug discovery, AI will soon lead to breakthroughs in disease research and diagnosis, personalized treatment, clinical trial research, radiology, and more. I believe that my background in Bioengineering, combined with a specialization in Artificial Intelligence in the Stark University MS/PhD Program, will allow me to contribute to these breakthroughs in a meaningful way, making healthcare affordable and improving patient outcomes.

At Gotham University, I majored in Bioengineering with a specialization in Computer Science, providing me with a strong foundation in Biology, Physics, Chemistry, Multivariable Calculus, Differential Equations, Linear Algebra, C++, Python, Matlab, Data Structures and Algorithms, and Computer Networks. In my capstone project, I created a congenital clubfoot compliance sensor which collected data to aid Dr. Otto Octavius and his peers in their disease research. This project finished in first place within the department-wide symposium. Furthermore, since graduating, I have continued expanding my CS competencies by taking additional coursework in NLP with Python & Data Structures and Algorithms through Stanford Continuing Studies and UC Berkeley Extension school respectively. In one of these classes, I led the development of a Random Forest anti-microbial peptide identification application based on frog-skin-secretion data. With these experiences, I believe my foundation in CS is robust enough to tackle the greater challenges of graduate study at Stark University.

Additionally, I have a breadth of lab experience ranging from Narcolepsy and Retinal Prosthesis labs at Stanford to catalytic enzyme-mimic research at Professor Erik Selvig’s Lab at the University of Sydney. As mentioned previously, I also spent a semester at Empire University as a Research Assistant in Dr. Bruce Banner’s laboratory, where I learned to apply Marinus to the evolution of a catalytic enzyme, a de novo beta barrel.

Today, at ShieldCodex, a protein engineering company, I conduct research to evolve enzyme therapies for various diseases through High Throughput Screening. During the development of a specific gene therapy, we found that we lacked the equipment to detect certain Post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the wet lab. I took the initiative to address this issue and I created a proprietary N-linked glycosylation detection and Tyrosine sulfation and Thrombin cut site prediction application. My Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) application was the first PTM detection tool at my company, and it had a higher accuracy (Matthews correlation coefficient) on the dataset than any other state-of-the-art application in this problem area. This application led to the development of a gene that was certifiably safer before insertion into the human body, and the application is now being deployed in the company-wide software package for projects beyond its original scope.

My experiences have shown me that there is much work to be done to integrate AI and Biology. During development of my PTM tool, I saw that the industry standard NLP-based approach to Tyrosine Sulfation detection has limited capacity to capture protein structure data. Additionally, Tyrosine Sulfation data was scarce. Similarly, in my capstone project at Gotham University, I found that a shortage of data had stunted congenital clubfoot research. To capture the nuances of biological data and address biological data scarcity, we require AI experts to create tailored algorithms and tools, rather than out-of-the-box solutions.

Thus, my research and work experiences have shown me that the overlap between Biology and Computer Science is ripe for exploration, and Stark University’s MS/PhD Computer Science Program seems perfectly suited to pursuing this goal. Specializing in Artificial Intelligence will allow me to formalize and further build ML expertise. I am excited by the prospect of coursework like CS311A: Machine Learning: From Gene Editing to Protein Optimization, which seems tailor-made for my interest in protein research. At the same time, I look forward to strengthening my knowledge of combinatorial algorithms, statistical theory, and probabilistic graphical models, which are all essential in building cutting edge AI products given the probabilistic nature and complexity of biological data. I am keen to explore the possibility of conducting protein modeling, folding, and optimization research with Professor Jane Foster’s group and the SAIR Lab. Her research to identify drug candidates with proxy regression models instead of physics simulations (such as Marinus) deeply interests me. The opportunity to work with Professor Foster, other CS faculty, and my peers will be a valuable asset in my academic development.

We are only beginning to understand the impact of AI on healthcare. The inevitable integration of these fields will require scientists with thorough expertise in both. My extensive work at the intersection of healthcare and ML has equipped me with the skills needed to help bridge the gap between them. I am confident that an education at Stark will allow me to grow as a data scientist, and help make healthcare more affordable and accessible, thus improving patient outcomes in the future.
