While trying to beat the stockfish chess engine, a question popped into my head: if we had a set with an infinitely large number of games, and assuming that both sides make perfect moves, could we prove that white always or doesn’t win? To put it more simply: can we make a winning decision from a set of an infinitely-large number of future scenarios? Certainly, I could extend this question to other games and real-life scenarios. Unfortunately, computing all probable states and representing the states as a graph is a time-consuming and expensive exercise. Stochastically optimizing these large graphs and churning out meaningful insights would require unorthodox approaches in optimization and Machine Learning. Yet, these difficulties represent exactly why I believe the MS in OR at Columbia University will provide the ideal environment to continue my education.

Working as a Machine Learning Engineer at Stark AI helped me understand how mathematically expensive it is to compute and optimize a Neural Network graph. Later, at Wayne Enterprises, I had the opportunity to manage and architect a Blockchain system, and was able to show how the consensus mechanism could be used to enable supply-chain transparency. Working for both of these startups helped me understand these challenges on an intricate level, while developing and maintaining large projects. After graduating from Eastern Univ. Engineering, I joined X-Consulting as an Application Development Associate, typically helping Japanese clients transform their business needs into technical specifications. Within days of joining X-Consulting, I took up voluntary leadership roles and delegated work to other Associates. Today, I am a part of a high performing agile team responsible for architecting and integrating SAP-ABAP analytics modules in large-scale SAP-ERP systems and data warehouses. Working for X-Consulting helped me understand the need for organizational hierarchy and the importance of data-driven decisions in an era that generates petabytes of information every second.

At Columbia University, I aim to improve my operational and technical skills, particularly in discrete optimization. Distinguished professors in Columbia’s Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research’s – Professor Charles Xavier and Professor Bruce Banner – have already been influential in my education. Their work on the Economics of Permissioned Blockchain Adoption allowed me to introspect the viable strategies required to adopt a permissioned blockchain network. Their thesis concludes by stating the strategies for adopting a blockchain so that the adoption is in equilibrium with the cost. In graduate school, I hope to study systems alternate to the blockchain that are inexpensive and can scale with ease. I believe without a doubt that by working with faculty such as Dr. Xavier and Dr. Banner, I can find an economically viable strategy that is as effective as a blockchain network, without compromising the consensus mechanism.

I plan to choose the Optimization concentration and include Computational Discrete Optimization in my coursework. After completing my master’s degree, I hope to work as an Analyst/SDE (Machine-Learning) for an organization like Google, Goldman Sachs, or Amazon. In the long term, I intend to become a Chief Technology Officer of a technology company. Thus, the department’s high job placement statistics (93%) are a major reason for my motivation to apply to Columbia University. I believe that my varied work experience and the coursework I have completed  in the past few years have all prepared me to pursue an MS degree in OR. I am able to pick up abstract concepts and new mathematics quickly. For these reasons, I am confident that I would excel in the program, and that upon completion of my graduate degree, I will be able to solve optimization problems (np-hard/np-complete), architect robust Machine-Learning models, and make critical decisions driven by data. To be offered admission to Columbia University would not only be a tremendous honor, but also confirm my hard work in the past, and my commitment to work even harder in the future.
