When studying in Professor Lucius Fox’s social psychology course at Gotham this fall, I realized how powerful the effects of cognitive dissonance can truly be. It reminded me of high school in China, when for various reasons I performed poorly in class, and teachers labeled me a “troubled student.” I knew this was not true; there were real human reasons for my struggles at the time, particularly my transition from international schooling in the US to the rigid classrooms of my home country. Many years passed before I successfully eliminated this label from my consciousness, eventually graduating from UC-Coastal City, and subsequently becoming a straight-A non-degree student in the Gotham Psychology Department this year.

Today, I am deeply fascinated by how people navigate inconsistent thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes by adjusting one to fit the other, and am almost intimidated by the potential of this process if engineered with direction. The same phenomenon used to praise people and lead them to success can also convince others to consolidate poor performance as part of their self-identity. The prevalence of ability-grouping in Chinese high schools often leads to discouraging feedback for lower-ranking students, creating the false belief that they are “troubled.” I believe this public-ranking system is deeply flawed, that I myself was an “exception to the rule,” and that many low-ranking students lose motivation to pursue their academic potential.

My curiosity regarding the potential for cognitive dissonance to be engineered in academic interventions has shaped my goal of pursuing an Ed.M. in Education and Human Development at Gotham University. I hope to contribute to the Chinese education system by researching cognitive frameworks that promote positive thoughts, beliefs, and actions, and ultimately help “troubled students” break free from self-limiting labels. By studying developmental and educational psychology, motivation, and cognitive dissonance at GGSE, I aim to prepare for future doctoral research in adolescent development, and its context in maladaptive classroom settings, and ultimately engineer interventions that allow students to systematically shift their thoughts, attitudes, and behaviors in positive directions.

I am fortunate to have already begun this journey as a GSAS non-degree student throughout the past year. Currently, in Professor Dick Grayson’s graduate course on developmental psychology, I am studying fundamental concepts in early-childhood development, and have elevated my critical thinking skills, especially in lectures where Professor Grayson challenges classic experiments. Furthermore, I am excited to soon study motivation in educational settings from Professor Edward Nygma in his J-term educational psychology course. Grounding myself in the theoretical and empirical literature of classroom motivation will be a crucial preparation for developing my own research questions as an aspiring graduate student.

After officially beginning the Ed.M. program, courses like Innovation Design: Educational Technology, led by Professor Viktor Fries, will help me cultivate interventions that move from theory into technologically driven application. With modest experience in technical development, I look forward to prototyping and testing interventions that allow students to resolve cognitive dissonance by systematically shifting their attitudes and behaviors towards a positive direction — or, to be bold, intentionally introducing cognitive dissonance with a strong force of appraisal that leans towards desired positive outcomes. Considering my own unique (and self-driven) educational experiences, I am deeply attracted to the learning philosophy of trial and error, and believe such courses will be an integral step toward achieving my goals.

I also cherish GGSE’s option to cross-register. I hope to take seminars with Professor Selina Kyle from the Gotham School of Business, as her research into the dysfunctional consequences of disconfirming high-performance expectations aligns perfectly with my goals in China. If students struggle academically due to cognitive dissonance from unmet expectations, can interpretation of these expectations change through intervention or appraisal? Dr. Kyle’s work, as described in Rebel Genius, provides a unique foundation for my quest to develop intellectual tools that shift resolution of cognitive dissonance in a positive way. By translating her work from organizational to classroom settings, I hope to study how “troubled students” can reframe into radiant “rebels” who change the world for the better through their unconventional outlooks.

My preparation for these goals began with my undergraduate Economics studies at UC-Coastal City, which provided a solid quantitative background and a lens to view problems through behavioral-economics models. After graduating, I took both undergraduate- and graduate-level psychology courses at Metropolis University and Gotham respectively, acquiring fundamental knowledge of general, personality, social, cognitive, and developmental psychology. Elective courses further equipped me with strong skills in psychology-oriented programming using Python, PsychoPy, R, and Stata.

As my cross-cultural research will aid in the translation of knowledge, skillsets, and interventions from GGSE to high schools in China, I have recently begun working with GGSE PhD Jiaqi Zhang as co-author of a study on how Chinese Immigrant and European-American parents and children use questions during free play. We are investigating questioning styles from a descriptive, cross-cultural, and intra-cultural perspective. I am currently responsible for categorizing and coding parents’ and children’s questions from videos of interactions through the software Datavyu, and creating the literature review. I look forward to taking on more responsibility and writing the paper with the goal of publishing in 2022/23.

I have also worked as a Research Assistant in Dr. Jonathan Crane’s laboratory since spring 2020. During this time, Professor Crane has inspired me to question where knowledge comes from, and ignited my desire to produce new knowledge. Working closely with his PhD student Barbara Gordon has enhanced my practical communication skills, as well as my technical skills in analyzing data through Python and R, and designing and translating surveys through online platforms.

Furthermore, after graduating college, I worked in the lab of Professor Haixian Li at Tsinghua University during the Spring 2021 semester. There, via Zoom, I delivered bi-monthly (and bilingual) lectures in Social Psychology for international students in the psychology graduate program. I believe this atypical teaching experience — combining a humor-based teaching style with the professionalism of my own favorite professors at Coastal City, Metropolis, and Gotham — will be a benefit as I begin the Ed.M. program.

Now, having broken free from the “troubled student” label and discovered my own academic passion, I am determined to develop intellectual tools to help similar students in Chinese high schools through methodologies based on cognitive dissonance. I aim to accomplish this goal through intensive study of developmental psychology and motivation, and hopefully by working closely with professors Edward Nygma, Selina Kyle, and Viktor Fries. My broad academic and research background in economics and psychology ensure my compatibility with the Human Development and Education program, and I believe that pursuing an Ed.M. at Gotham will fully prepare me to effect real change for students in China and beyond.
