On a hot summer afternoon at a South Gotham pier, I watched thousands of people interact with computers. Ninety-six poles emitted light and sound, and visitors touch-activated symphonic waves, gasping at the semblant magic of it all. Exhausted from weeks of design, fabrication, and installation with my team, I observed these crowds with their frenzy of languages but matching reactions of wonder. Though it was my job, I could not help asking: Why does this union of design and technology work so seamlessly to evoke seemingly universal happiness? Or, working backward, how do differences in our abilities, experiences, identity, or culture change the way we interact with the world?

The potential of design and psychology to create productive commonality — this is why I want to study in the Masters of Human-Computer Interaction program at Gotham University. As a trained architect, I see great potential in the field of HCI to shrink the scale of my previous work in public spaces in Gotham, New York, Miami, and Sydney — to make it more user-focused while expanding it to be more human-centric. The MHCI program will provide me with the resources to accomplish this, approaching both physical and digital design challenges that integrate psychological components unapproachable through architecture.

The curriculum’s emphasis on technical skills is particularly important to me; it will build my capacity to translate ideas into workable prototypes. Special Topics courses will teach me how to conduct user research and identify opportunities where machine learning can add value. AI Product and Service Design, taught by Professor Lucius Fox, perfectly embodies this approach. It asks how designers can meet users’ needs, while building purposefully inclusive AI that does not betray users’ trust or ethics. Furthermore, Dr. Selina Kyle’s work in accessibility demonstrates how systems can be leveraged to equalize opportunities for marginalized populations; as my own father is partially blind and deaf, this topic is especially important to me. I would be eager to work with Dr. Kyle on research that explores assistive technology, and thus develop skills in ergonomic design for dynamically adaptive devices.

Furthermore, the MHCI capstone will be a paramount opportunity for me to collaborate in applying human-centric values across the product development lifecycle. I hope to work with a sponsor such as Daggett Digital or Riddle Labs, exploring HCI applications that I have not yet approached in my architectural and design career. Hopefully, this experience will prepare me to work, post-graduation, at firms such as Turtle Design or YEO, the latter of whose Dusk platform exemplifies the type of digital/physical solutions I hope to build in my career.

Studying architecture at Metropolis University proved valuable in learning problem-solving through design-thinking. I studied how physical space can shape opportunities for user interactions, and through intensive studios, learned to design at different scales. In one particular course of note, Design Operations and Tactics with Professor Barbara Gordon, I explored how embedded technologies provide a framework for improvisation between people and the urban environment. Utilizing architecture as a technological interface, and analyzing concepts such as ubiquitous computing and calm technology, I obtained my first introduction to the world of HCI. Furthermore, in my senior year research developing large-scale 3D printing technologies for construction, my partner and I incorporated a diversity of uses into our building design. Under the advisory of Prof. Viktor Fries, we were selected to present at a TEDxMetro U event, where we engaged with academic and industry professionals who offered critical feedback, strengthening the project and demonstrating the value of cross-disciplinary collaboration.

As a designer at WayneLab, I have traveled to four continents to build unique large-scale interactive pieces that shape experiences through technology, color, space, and materiality. When designing for a project, I am cognizant of the various user groups along the lifespan of the project: the fabrication specialists, the construction team, and the audience. Using Rhino 3D, I developed a frame-support system for computationally-derived hanging art pieces that has been adapted for suspended sculptures in Sydney, Philadelphia, and Boston. I was the installation project manager in Australia, where I oversaw international transportation, facilitated installation logistics, and managed construction. Aware that every stage of a project is essential for optimizing user experience, my studies in the MHCI program will maintain a conscientious intention when investigating both big-picture ideas and smaller mechanical processes.

Much like the glinting lights of my installation on that Gotham City pier, technology and design offer the opportunity for interactions and connections beyond language barriers, geographical limitations, (dis)capacities, and identity politics. Now, by studying user research methods, cognitive processes, and human-centric design approaches in the MHCI program at Gotham, I will seek to evolve as a product designer who can diversify designs to be more accessible, user-friendly, and adaptable for all people.
