As a software engineer with WayneHealth Group, I maintain data pipelines and batch processing in the modernization team. In 2020, following a health check on existing infrastructure, I discovered that pipelines were delivering data too slowly to clients. After comparing our runtimes to industry standards, I pitched a project using open-source Apache Airflow to help automate pipelines and centralize patient data into a single workflow. However, when considering how to automate 35% of the data, I learned from the billing team how frequently bills are refinanced in our long-term elderly care programs. Thus, for the first time, I was able to personalize parameters in the pipeline for unaccounted customers. Learning the importance of context for efficient yet equitable automation, I found myself incredibly curious about data-modeling methodologies that can truly represent real-world situations.

Through Gotham University’s Master’s program in Data Science, I hope to further explore how to enhance representation of data minorities in ML models, and thus ensure inclusive healthcare access for the customers I serve. Earning my MBA at Metropolis University taught me how to coordinate the need for quantitative reasoning and human intuition through A/B testing, and I believe the MSDS program will build on that foundation. Mathematical Foundations in Computer Science, for example, will help me build real-time analytics dashboards that account for insurance claim data-entry errors through discrete probabilistic models. In the same vein, elective offerings such as Big Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence will enable me to choose predictive models and evaluate their accuracy when applied to large data sets — particularly useful when predicting whether an insurance claim will necessitate revisions.

Resources like the IGNITE competition will also offer opportunities to collaborate on flexible models that solve real-world situations. Having worked on Apache Airflow implementation in WayneHealth, I understand how collaboration can play a key role in implementing a new idea. Having my IGNITE team’s project evaluated by MSDS professors, with their expertise in modular design and user experience, will only help me evaluate my own performance as I translate my education into functional healthcare applications. Thus, I am certain that Gotham’s MSDS program will prepare me to succeed in a team setting that balances many developer roles, while equipping me to better deliver sales pitches to investors.

Upon graduating, I endeavor to apply my education toward applied healthcare projects that focus on providing easy access to preventative care. Transparency is an integral part of healthcare access because it reduces the expenses and time necessary to find patient care. To help facilitate this transparency, I plan to transition into a Senior Data Scientist role in the Emerging Technologies Collaborative (ETC) at WayneHealth, hopefully working on projects that implement data-driven recommendations for our automated batch processes and servers. When storing vast amounts of patient data across different platforms, vulnerability patches and triage alerts often lead to reactive outcomes that can create downtime for end users. As a result, I seek to implement agentless server monitoring to, first, predict unscheduled outages for our billing and medical coverage systems, and second, recognize patterns in server behavior. Helping recognize outage patterns will not only help me identify problems beforehand, but also decipher the causes of live servers crashing. However, projects outside of WayneHealth excite me as well, including Amgen’s Crystal Bone algorithm which uses AI and machine-learning models to detect bones at risk for osteoporotic fractures. This project was the first tool I have ever seen that uses diagnostic codes sourced from WayneHealth electronic health records, and it inspired me to create my own model using EHR data. In the future, I hope to use EHR diagnostic codes to predict the cost of treatment for those prone to risk, as indicated by the algorithm.

Not only has my position as a software engineer equipped me with strong technical skills, but it has also given me the discipline to continuously learn what I do not yet know. On a project named Karra, an optical-character recognition engine which scans personal information from faxed hospital claim forms, I learned how to develop my own algorithms to calculate the coordinates of form fields to parse data. The technical skills I have gained, in tandem with the unwavering tenacity I developed in this position, will allow me to face any challenge that arises during the MSDS program.

To further prepare for the rigors of the MSDS program, I completed University of Pennsylvania Engineering MOOCs on Coursera, including the Introduction to Python and Java specialization taught by Brandon Krakowsky and the course Computational Thinking for Problem Solving by Susan Davidson. These MOOCs helped me comprehend important programming paradigms such as unit testing and debugging, which will help me test edge cases in MSDS course projects. Also, MOOCs from UC San Diego, such as Python for Data Science and Probability and Statistics in Data Science Using Python, enabled me to optimize data-cleansing techniques for better runtimes. The MCDS program’s Big Data Analytics course will culminate this self-learning effort, providing a solid theoretical understanding of the tools and techniques used to extract insights from large datasets.

While I have taken on a breadth of challenging problems in computer science and implemented solutions at WayneHealth, my prior undergraduate performance did not always reflect my best ability. Between Spring 2016 and Spring 2017, I experienced a personal health challenge that required substantial time away from the UC Coast City campus. I was further distracted by the realities of personally financing my education – working full-time for the National Security Agency (NSA) – while also suffering the loss of a close family member. Even as I struggled I knew the importance of higher education, and, advocating for my own success, I persisted. To strengthen my educational background, I enrolled in online courses and built coping mechanisms, such as managing my time between online courses and on-campus courses efficiently. In the end, these efforts helped me graduate early in the fall of 2018, and I plan to apply the same level of resilience throughout the rest of my academic and professional career.

As I grow increasingly aware of the intersection between ML and social computing, I am determined to study learning techniques such as principal component analysis, and to perform research in data organization/completeness. With my strong self-guided background in applied computer science, and my professional experience with ML and software development in the healthcare insurance industry, the practical knowledge I build at Gotham will help me make voices heard in the data we interact with in our daily lives.
