As an intern at Wayne Semiconductor Corp., I helped optimize operational expenditures, saving over $200 thousand annually toward production of polycrystalline silicon for solar applications. During that time, I witnessed massive improvements to polysilicon production processes, and expected similar improvements for the Silicon Photovoltaic (PV) cells produced from this polysilicon. But, these improvements have not yet been realized. Raised in the scorching climate of Nigeria, and having seen electricity as a luxury, I am all too aware of the need to understand how we can more efficiently harness solar energy. Consequently, I have become passionate about the manufacturing processes for these more sustainable and widely available forms of energy. Today, my ultimate purpose is to significantly improve solar cells’ low efficiency by studying multi-junction PV cells, as this method overcomes some of the drawbacks of the single junction cell by absorbing different wavelengths of sunlight. By pursuing further studies in the area of semiconductors and its application in the solar industry, I will be able to assist in paving the way for proper harnessing and accessibility of solar energy.

With a Master’s in Electrical Engineering and a focus on semiconductors and devices from Gotham University, I will gain the necessary skills to achieve my goals. I am particularly excited about courses in the properties of semiconductors, integrated circuit fabrication, and solar energy conversion, which will give me a strong foundation in this field, and hopefully allow me to leverage my knowledge of semiconductor technology to reduce recombination losses and bulkiness in multi-junction PV cells. In the Advanced Micro and Nano Fabrication Laboratory, I will have the opportunity to test my fabrication skills through experiments like lattice matching of multijunction cells. Ultimately, these resources at Gotham will allow me to take part in further solar cell research, and thus pursue my goal of contributing to the development of more accessible energy sources.

At Gotham, I will meet a broad network of engineering students and faculty, and have access to research opportunities within the remarkable nanogotham facilities. I want to utilize my understanding of nanoparticles in cell fabrication to assist in experiments downshifting high-frequency light for multi-junction solar cell applications. I am excited to work with Dr. Lucius Fox, whose research in photovoltaics addresses issues in reflection and absorption losses, and has presented solutions like utilizing silicon nanoparticles to increase solar-cell efficiency. I hope to contribute to Dr. Fox’s work by using my nanofabrication skills to investigate efficient and cost-effective applications of ultrathin crystalline silicon technology.

In my undergraduate years, I joined the Nanofabrication & Electron Transport Laboratory at Empire State University. As a researcher under Prof. Ra’s al Ghul, I investigated physics and electrical transport properties in low-dimensional semiconductors, like MoS2. I acquired skills in microscopy and photolithography, including using optical microscopy to analyze and classify substrate for device applications. This experience gave me an understanding of semiconductor physics and its practical application in device fabrication, preparing me to tackle course concepts at Gotham, as well as collaborate with faculty members to further address issues in PV cells.

I continued to learn about collaboration and adaptability by serving as the secretary of Empire State’s Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and working as an electrical-engineering intern at Wayne, the world’s largest polycrystalline semiconductor manufacturer. This internship showed me how research in semiconductors progresses into commercial application, further spiking my interest in the field. I also helped optimize their safety system by creating a program to size valves and electric actuators, and generated power-consumption savings through Variable Frequency Drive (VFD) installation. As secretary of IEEE, I collaborated with electrical engineering faculty to create programs that would enhance the recognition of the department and bring in more students. I also mentored freshmen in Electrical Engineering regarding future potential for research. Through these experiences, I learned how to be a leader, to collaborate, and to work with a group towards a common goal. I hope to contribute to the IEEE Gotham chapter, and larger engineering community, in much the same way.

In my final undergraduate semester, I took elective courses in device physics and solar-energy generation to gain a deeper understanding of photocells and current technologies in the solar industry. In “Alternative Energy Sources and Conversion,” my final project simulated a model for efficiency improvement using Lumogen Red 305 for downshifting and Sodium Yttrium Fluoride as our upconverting nanoparticle, and calculated about 15% increase in efficiency using luminescent concentrators. I believe these successes have prepared me to take part in future research opportunities and confidently communicate my work to peers and faculty members.

After graduation, I aim to work with solar research organizations like Applied Materials or the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). I want to fully understand solar cells, particularly multi-junction cells, and how to improve their efficiency so as to create a better global ecosystem. I am fully ready to take on the challenges that the Gotham master’s program provides, and will work hard to honor it if given the opportunity.
