The headlines kept me awake late into a weekday night: six Asian women shot dead in Georgia, targeted for being “sexual temptations.” Amid my grief was a streak of bewilderment: how did anyone develop such a view of Asian women? I knew the stereotype had arisen from centuries of exotification and exploitation by the West. But this was in stark contrast to my lived experience and that of many young diasporic Asians, raised in immigrant families with little discussion and sometimes outright discouragement of sexuality.

If two prominent academic concepts are to be believed – the immigrant paradox in public health, and the model minority theory in sociology – then one may conclude that Asian Americans are healthier and less prone to risky behavior than typical Americans. Perhaps as a result, Asian Americans are frequently erased in health research, even that which purports to present racial disparities in a particular health area. However, these simplifications have led to neglect of the very real challenges that Asian Americans, particularly women, face in the United States. I hope to challenge these generalizations and study how young second-generation Asian American women navigate sexual health and safety in intimate relationships, given the conflicting messages they may receive from the different cultures with which they grew up. How do these Asian women grapple with being simultaneously hypersexualized and desexualized, and what vulnerabilities does that contradiction generate?

The PhD program in Community Health at Gotham University would uniquely empower me to explore my research questions, given the university’s exceptional strength in both public health and the study of Asian-American communities. Those in public health often exalt the field’s interdisciplinary nature, and the CH program truly lives up to this by building an outside minor right into the curriculum; with my interests inextricably linked to Asian-American and gender studies, I would embrace the opportunity to formally weave these disciplines into my public-health education through a sociology minor. Similarly, the Wayne School features an array of faculty and research centers specializing in immigration, race, and gender, a telling sign that my own research directions would have ample support.

I am particularly impressed by the work of Dr. Barbara Lee, whose expertise on the confluent impacts of immigration status, ethnic background, and gender on health closely mirrors my own interests. Her leadership of the BOLD research project highlights the healthcare access challenges of vulnerable Asian American young adults, the same underrecognized population I hope to center in my own research. I learned in a conversation with Dr. Lee that she is starting to investigate how immigration status impacts access to sexual and reproductive healthcare through both the BOLD study and a potential upcoming project, and I can tell that working on either of these projects as a graduate researcher would build the precise skills I need to answer my own inquiries. The CH program’s strong grounding in social sciences and social justice, along with Dr. Lee’s mentorship, would provide a foundation for me to fully explore my research interests in a manner unparalleled by other programs I’ve seen.

At the University of Metropolis, I was fortunate to have access to the unique Health & Society major and Asian-American studies courses, through which I combined the study of health and medicine with a social-sciences perspective in a manner similar to the CH program’s approach. My personal and academic background sparked my passion for studying how social structures and identities are connected to health; subsequently, I’ve sought opportunities to work on meaningful public-health topics and accumulate research experience. I took on the role as a research coordinator at Metropolis Medicine’s Department of Ob/Gyn to immerse myself in the field of sexual/reproductive health – a topic at the foundation of my research interests, but one I had little interaction with growing up. At the same time, I learned how to execute research projects from quick survey studies to years-long clinical trials. I also gained data-analysis skills through a statistics minor and survey research internships, and qualitative research experience through my student capstone projects and my organization of a study on pregnancy-care experiences for my current position, providing openings for me to utilize either method or even mixed methods in my future research.

Most recently, for my MPH capstone project, I oversaw a focus-group study assessing perceptions of campus intimate partner violence resources. As a former student worker at the Metropolis Violence Prevention center, I was familiar with the range of resources offered by the school, but I learned in conversations that they were often unhelpful or simply not promoted enough, and I sought to transform these conversations into something more tangibly impactful. When the COVID-19 pandemic and campus closures threatened the project’s recruitment efforts, I drew upon my experience to suggest student groups and other campus entities with whom to collaborate. I contributed to not only recruitment but also discussion moderation and qualitative analysis, culminating with a research report and presentation about how remotely-offered student services could convert the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic into an opportunity to increase access. Thus, my extensive research background, adaptability, and passion for advocacy all prepare me well to join the CH PhD program and continue uplifting the voices of community members through research, while further developing my simultaneous interests in ethnic studies, sexual/reproductive health, and gender-based violence.

I envision my future self as a professor at a school of public health or a similar socially-conscious institution, expanding upon my PhD work to teach and conduct research on the social determinants of Asian American and immigrant health. It shouldn’t take a once-in-a-lifetime tragedy and temporary media buzz to spotlight these overlooked groups when my peers and I have been grappling with racism and acculturation for as long as we can remember. I hope that my academic career can validate these stories, and highlight the everyday – but no less important – challenges to our well-being that arise from our identities. I would be honored to begin my career in academia at Gotham’s Community Health program, a department just as committed as I am to pushing the disciplinary boundaries of health-equity research and intersectionality.
