In 2012, when my mother required skin grafting to treat a third-degree burn on her arm, I found myself captivated by the physiological properties of human tissue. I marveled at how skin taken from her thigh could develop new blood vessels and connect seamlessly to surrounding healthy tissue. Seeing this phenomenon, I posed my first research question: Is it possible to grow functional human tissue in a laboratory? Ten years later, as a research fellow at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), I still pursue this question. My mother’s procedure is a constant reminder of the humanity that drives the science. To me, tissue biofabrication research represents the tantalizing potential to usher in new approaches to medical procedures and expand our understanding of various disease states. Over time, my work has unearthed more intricate questions: How can we engineer more physiologically relevant tissue in vitro and better recapitulate native tissue architecture? Can these tissues be modulated for functional use in clinical and translational applications? These are ultimately the questions I seek to answer through Gotham University’s (GU) PhD in Biomedical Engineering.

Dr. Victor Fries’s lab is the ideal environment to explore my interests. His research has been instrumental in pushing the boundaries of my current experimental approaches: because of his work on using decellularized extracellular matrix bioinks for bioprinting, I am motivated to incorporate more biologically inspired materials in my tissue constructs. I can also foresee how my interdisciplinary research experience can help extend his lab’s research scope. Through a forthcoming collaboration between my NIH lab and Dr. Fries’s and Dr. Edward Nygma’s GU labs, I can bring my experience in developing vascularized lung tissue for high-throughput screening platforms to create lung-based disease models in his lab. I can thereby act as an institutional bridge, connecting government and academic research sectors for a mutual scientific goal. Drs. Selina Kyle and Lucius Fox’s work is also extremely compelling – their respective cardiac tissue and tumor microenvironment models are wonderful avenues to use tissue engineering to understand complex diseases. For these reasons, I can visualize myself thriving at GU: I am confident I can fit in well with current projects, but I also believe I can contribute to expanding GU’s scientific impact in tissue biofabrication.

I have dedicated nearly six years developing the skills to excel as a graduate student. At Empire State University, I conducted four years of research, with each opportunity guiding me closer to tissue biofabrication. I first started in Dr. Talia al Ghul’s lab, where I worked for a year using adeno-associated viruses and CRISPR/Cas9 to regenerate inner ear cells. I soon became fascinated with CRISPR/Cas9 and started in Dr. Dick Grayson’s lab to explore my curiosity for disease modeling. I thus worked for two years generating a CRISPR/Cas9-based system to induce Alzheimer’s-disease-related phenotypes in stem cell-derived neurons, after which I wondered how I could study pathogenesis on more complex in vitro systems. Consequently, I co-led a project in Dr. Barbara Gordon’s lab developing tumor spheroids and analyzing volatile metabolites to understand the metabolic processes of ovarian cancer. Through undergraduate research, I learned crucial biological experimentation, but also exercised my passion for adaptive science communication – this allowed me to independently win competitive research grants and present six posters at local and national symposia.

I was first introduced to tissue biofabrication research when I interned in Dr. Harleen Quinzel’s 3D Tissue Bioprinting Lab and developed 3D omentum tissue to model ovarian cancer metastasis. Previous projects had fascinated me, but this one stirred something deep within, reminding me of initial scientific motivations and inspiring a new commitment to improve drug discovery platforms. This motivated me to accept a two-year position as a postbaccalaureate researcher in Dr. Quinzel’s lab. In this role, I spearheaded three projects focused on the lung. The first two – 2D and 3D lung epithelium models – were used to study viral infection and conduct COVID-19 drug screening, and the third was a collaborative project with GlaxoSmithKline to model and conduct drug screening for non-small cell lung carcinoma. My work has culminated in several poster presentations, a first-author publication (in preparation), and a second-author paper for a project developing 3D epithelial tissue on a microfluidics screening platform. Overall, my projects have trained me to identify a promising research question, execute experimental milestones, overcome obstacles with novel solutions, collaborate with diverse individuals, and finalize a project to publication.

At the NIH, I have worked diligently to understand the limitations of current in vitro platforms and the advantages afforded by 3D vascularized tissues for disease modeling. Now, I strive to cultivate more skillsets and tackle new scientific questions, both of which GU hosts unique opportunities for. I am excited by the prospect of taking classes alongside medical students and initiating new collaborations with physicians, which will provide the vital clinical perspective that I hope to gain for my career. Using my education, I aim to build a future as an educator, translational scientist, and biomedical engineering professor, leading my own tissue biofabrication lab to engineer new medical technologies. I believe that the past few years of dedicated work have prepared me extensively, and I look forward to taking on the intellectual challenges that GU has to offer.
