Academic background:
  Undergraduate Institution: Empire State University
  Undergraduate Major: Biomedical Engineering
  Relevant projects: Development of inner ear cells using adeno-associated viruses and CRISPR/Cas9, Generating a CRISPR/Cas9-based system to induce Alzheimer’s-disease-related phenotypes in stem cell-derived neurons, Development of tumor spheroids and analyzing volatile metabolites to understand the metabolic processes of ovarian cancer.
  Any honors or Awards: Competitive research grants and presented six posters at local and national symposia.

Specifics about the program applying to:
  Degree: PhD
  Institution name: Gotham University
  Program: Biomedical Engineering
  Faculty name: Dr. Victor Fries, Dr. Edward Nygma, Dr. Selina Kyle, Dr. Lucius Fox
  research work you would like to do with Faculty: Incorporating more biologically inspired materials in tissue constructs, creating lung-based disease models, exploring tissue engineering to understand complex diseases.

Goals:
  Short-term career goals: To explore my research questions using Dr. Fries’s lab and contribute to expanding Gotham University’s scientific impact in tissue biofabrication.
  Long-term career goals: To better understand how to engineer more physiologically relevant tissue in vitro and better recapitulate native tissue architecture, and modulating these tissues for functional use in clinical and translational applications.

Work Experience:
  Job title: Research Fellow
  Company name: National Institutes of Health (NIH)
  Job responsibilities: Developing vascularized lung tissue for high-throughput screening platforms, conducting research on tissue biofabrication.
  Duration: Nearly 6 years
  Skills gained: Developing skills in tissue biofabrication, adapting science communication, research experience.

Research Experience:
  Research topic: Tissue biofabrication
  Research summary: Investigating the potential to grow functional human tissue in a laboratory, exploring the use of decellularized extracellular matrix bioinks for bioprinting, developing more physiologically relevant tissue in vitro, better recapitulating native tissue architecture, modulating these tissues for functional use in clinical and translational applications.
  Skills gained: Biological experimentation, adaptive science communication, experience in developing tissue biofabrication research.
  Any publications, presentations or awards related to the research:

Any specific guidelines:
  word count: 1000
